README.md, before:

[![Create a Slack Account with us](https://img.shields.io/badge/Create_Slack_Account-The_Carpentries-071159.svg)](https://swc-slack-invite.herokuapp.com/) 
[![Slack Status](https://img.shields.io/badge/Slack_Channel-dc--genomics-E01563.svg)](https://swcarpentry.slack.com/messages/C9N1K7DCY) 

# Shell Genomics lessons

An introduction to the Unix shell for people working with genomics data. This lesson is part of the [Data Carpentry Genomics Workshop](http://www.datacarpentry.org/genomics-workshop/). Please see http://www.datacarpentry.org/shell-genomics/ for a rendered version of this material.

## Contribution

Make a suggestion or correct an error by [raising an Issue](https://github.com/datacarpentry/shell-genomics/issues).

## Code of Conduct

All participants should agree to abide by the [Data Carpentry Code of Conduct](http://www.datacarpentry.org/code-of-conduct/).

## Authors

Shell Genomics is authored and maintained by the [community](https://github.com/datacarpentry/shell-genomics/network/members). This repository is maintained by [Bastian Greshake Tzovaras](https://github.com/gedankenstuecke), [Shichen Wang](https://github.com/swang8), [Sue McClatchy](https://github.com/smcclatchy) and [Anita Schürch](https://github.com/aschuerch)

## Citation

Please cite as:

Shell Genomics. November 2017. http://datacarpentry.github.io/shell-genomics/.

Commit message:

Added note that this is adapted to run on Eddie

README.md, after:

[![Create a Slack Account with us](https://img.shields.io/badge/Create_Slack_Account-The_Carpentries-071159.svg)](https://swc-slack-invite.herokuapp.com/) 
[![Slack Status](https://img.shields.io/badge/Slack_Channel-dc--genomics-E01563.svg)](https://swcarpentry.slack.com/messages/C9N1K7DCY) 

# Shell Genomics lessons

Note: this is a fork of the Data Carpentry's material, but adapted to run on the University of Edinburgh's Eddie cluster.

An introduction to the Unix shell for people working with genomics data. This lesson is part of the [Data Carpentry Genomics Workshop](http://www.datacarpentry.org/genomics-workshop/). Please see http://www.datacarpentry.org/shell-genomics/ for a rendered version of this material.

## Contribution

Make a suggestion or correct an error by [raising an Issue](https://github.com/datacarpentry/shell-genomics/issues).

## Code of Conduct

All participants should agree to abide by the [Data Carpentry Code of Conduct](http://www.datacarpentry.org/code-of-conduct/).

## Authors

Shell Genomics is authored and maintained by the [community](https://github.com/datacarpentry/shell-genomics/network/members). This repository is maintained by [Bastian Greshake Tzovaras](https://github.com/gedankenstuecke), [Shichen Wang](https://github.com/swang8), [Sue McClatchy](https://github.com/smcclatchy) and [Anita Schürch](https://github.com/aschuerch)

## Citation

Please cite as:

Shell Genomics. November 2017. http://datacarpentry.github.io/shell-genomics/.
